Ad hominem
Means "against the man". It is a literary term that involves commenting on or against an opponent to undermine him instead of his arguments.


(Related) Ad Hominem Argument
Attacks the opposing speaker or another person rather than addressing the issues at hand


(Related) Ad hominem
Latin for to the man, this fallacy refers to the specific diversionary tactic of switching the argument from the issue at hand to the character of the other speaker. It you argue that a park I'm your community should not be renovated because the person supporting it was arrested during a domestic dispute, then you are guilty of ad hominem.


(Related) Ad Hominem
In an argument, this is an attack on the person rather than on the opponent's ideas. It comes from the Latin meaning "against the man."


(Related) ad hominem
links validity of premise to characteristic of advocate; not necessarily a fallacypersonal attacks are only ad hominem arguments when used to devalue argument


(Related) inverse ad hominem
praise a source to support the source's claim; i.e. appeal to authority (A is an authority on this subject so their claim must be true)


Allusion
A reference, usually oblique or faint, to another thing, idea, or person


Anaphora: Definition
Repetition of the same word or words at the beginning of successive phrases, clauses, or sentences.


(Related) Anaphora: What It Does
Emphasis


(Related) Anaphora: Example
Will he read the book? Will he learn? Will he live according to what he learned?


(Related) Anaphora
the repeating group of words at the beginning of successive clauses


(Related) Anaphora
Exact repetition of words or phrases at the beginning of successive lines or sentences


(Related) anaphora
repetition of the same word or phrase at the beginning of successive clauses, sentences, or lines of poetry.


Anecdote
...


(Related) Anecdote
A story or brief episode told by the writer or a character to illustrate a point.


(Related) Anecdote
A short story used to illustrate a point the author is making


(Related) Anecdote
a brief narrative that focuses on a particular incident or event


Antimetabole
the repetition of words in successive clauses in reverse grammatical order. The difference between antimetabole and chiasmus is that the chiasmus reverses grammatical order but not the same words.Example from JFK's Inauguration Speech, "As not what your country can do for you but what you can do for your country."


(Related) antimetabole
the repetition of words in successive clauses in reverse grammatical order. The difference between antimetabole and chiasmus is that the chiasmus reverses grammatical order but does not use the same wording. Antimetabole uses the same wording. Example from JFK, "Ask not what your country can do for you, but what you can do for your country."


(Related) Antimetabole
the identical or near repetition of words in one phrase or clause in reverse order in the next phrase or clause; ex. "Ask not what your country can do for you; as what you can do for your country." (type of parallelism)


Chiasmus
a statement consisting of two parallel parts in which the second part is structurally reversed. (Susan walked in, and out ruhshed Mary.)


(Related) chiasmus
a figure of speech and generally a syntactical structure wherein the order of the terms in the first half of a parallel clause is reversed in the second


(Related) Chiasmus
a statement consisting of two parallel parts in which the second part is structurally reversed


antithesis
opposition, or contrast of ideas or words in a parallel construction


(Related) Antithesis
A rhetorical device which employs a balanced pair of opposites


(Related) Antithesis
An opposition or contrast of ideas that is often expressed in balanced phrases or clauses. .


(Related) Antithesis
establishes a clear, contrasting relationship between two ideas by juxtaposing themEx: If it is strenuous, it is good for you.


(Related) Antithesis
two contrasting ideas are intentionally juxtaposedEx: Work hard today, rest easy tomorrow


(Related) antithesis
Placement of contrasting or opposing words, phrases, clauses, or sentences side by side. Following are examples:"The more acute the experience, the less articulate its expression."(Harold Pinter, "Writing for the Theatre," 1962)


(Related) antithesis
A rhetorical term for the juxtaposition of contrasting ideas in balanced phrases or clauses. "You're easy on the eyesHard on the heart." - (Terri Clark)


juxtaposition
A literary technique in which 2 or more ideas, places, characters & their actions are placed side by side in a narrative or poem for the purpose of developing comparisons & contrasts. Ex. "It was the best of times, it was the worst of times..." - A Tale of Two Cities, Charles Dickens


(Related) Juxtaposition
placing two elements side by side to present a comparison or contrast.


(Related) Juxtaposition
Placing things side by side for the purposes of comparison.


(Related) juxtaposition
placing two things side by side, usually to show contrast


(Related) juxtaposition
an act or instance of placing close together or side by side, especially for comparison or contrast.


Asyndeton
the deliberate omission of conjunctions between a series of related clauses


(Related) Asyndeton 2
Examples:"Veni, vidi, vici." (I came, I saw, I conquered) (Julius Caesar)"Dogs, undistinguishable in mire. Horses, scarcely better; splashed to their very blinkers. Foot passengers, jostling one another's umbrellas in a general infection of ill-temper..." (from Bleak House, Charles Dickens)


(Related) asyndeton
[W]e shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose ay foe to assure the survival and the success of liberty.


(Related) asyndeton
omission of conjunctions between words, phrases, or clauses. It tends to speed up the flow of the sentence. Example: From Lincoln, "goverment of the people, by the people, for the people..."


(Related) Asyndeton: Definition
Omitting conjunctions between words, phrases, or clauses (opposite of polysyndeton).


(Related) Asyndeton: What It Does
Gives the effect of multiplicity and that a list is incomplete, Strengthens a climax, Synonymity


(Related) Asyndeton: Example
She likes pickles, olives, raisins, dates.


Begging the question
parts of what one said could be true, a way of avoiding the question, you are begging for an answer


(Related) begging the question
a fallacy in which the premises include the claim that the conclusion is true or (directly or indirectly) assume that the conclusion is true. This sort of "reasoning" is fallacious because simply assuming that the conclusion is true (directly or indirectly) in the premises does not constitute evidence for that conclusion. Obviously, simply assuming a claim is true does not serve as evidence for that claim. This is especially clear in particularly blatant cases: "X is true. The evidence for this claim is that X is true." Some cases of question begging are fairly blatant, while others can be extremely subtle."If such actions were not illegal, then they would not be prohibited by the law.""The belief in God is universal. After all, everyone believes in God."


(Related) Begging the Question
Using a premise to prove a conclusion when the premise itself assumes the conclusion is true; The first claim is initially loaded with the very conclusion one has yet to prove.


(Related) Begging the question (circular logic)
happens when the writer presents an arguable point as a fact that supports the argument. This error leads to an argument that goes around and around, with evidence making the same claim as the proposition.


(Related) begging the question
when what you are trying to prove is assumed implicitly in one of the premises (circular reasoning); (examples: "A is true because A is true"; "A is true because B is true, and B is true because A is true"; "A is true because B is true, and B is true because C is true, and C is true because A is true") OR when no real evidence is given to prove the conclusion (example: "Murder is morally wrong. So active euthanasia is morally wrong." The premise that gets left out is "active euthanasia is murder." And that is a debatable premise; therefore, the argument "begs" or evades the question of whether active euthanasia is murder by simply not stating the premise.)


Concrete Diction
Things that are material, rather than idea and concepts.


(Related) Abstract Diction
Ideas and Concepts


(Related) General Diction
General descriptions; un-elaborated


(Related) Specific Diction
Use of specific descriptions and words


(Related) Diction
the author's choice of words that creates tone, attitude, and style, as well as meaning


(Related) Formal Diction
Contains language that creates an elevated tone. It is free of slang, idioms, colloquialisms, and contractions. It often contains polysyllabic words, sophisticated syntax, and elegant word choice.


(Related) Neutral Diction
Uses standard language and vocabulary without elaborate words and may include contractions.


(Related) Informal Diction
The language of everyday use. It is relaxed and conversational.It often includes common and simple words, idioms, slang, jargon, and contractions.


(Related) Concrete Diction
Specific words that describe physical qualities orconditions.


(Related) Abstract Diction
Refers to language that denotes ideas, emotions,conditions, or concepts that are intangible.


(Related) Abstract Diction
Language that denotes ideas, emotions, conditions, or concepts that are intangible-impenetrable, incredible, inscrutable, inconceivable, unfathomable


(Related) Concrete Diction
Specific words that describe physical qualities or conditions


(Related) diction
Means "word choice."Refers to word choice as a reflection of style.Different types and arrangements of words have significant effects on meaning.Purpose, tone, point of view, persona, verve, color, all are affected by diction.


(Related) High/Formal Diction
Contains language that creates an elevated tone; free of slang, idioms, colloquialisms, and contractions; contains polysyllabic words, sophisticated syntax, and elegant word choice


(Related) Informal/low diction
The language of everyday use; relaxed and conversational; common and simple words, idioms, slang, jargon


(Related) Neutral Diction
Uses standard language and vocabulary without elaborate words and may include contractions


Colloquial
a term identifying the diction of the common, ordinary folks, especially in a specific region or area


(Related) Colloquial Language
Slang or common language that is informal


(Related) Colloquialism
informal words or expressions not usually acceptable in formal writing; a colloquial expression


(Related) Colloquial
the use of slang in writing, often to create local color and to provide an informal tone. Huckleberry Finn in written in a __ style.


(Related) Colloquialism
informal words or expressions not usually acceptable in formal writing


vernacular
the language spoken by the people who live in a particular locality


dialect
a variety of speech characterized by its particular grammar or pronunciation, often associated with a particular geographical region.


(Related) Dialect
the recreation of regional spoken language, such as a Southern one. Hurston uses this in Their Eyes Were Watching God.


(Related) Dialect
Nonstandard subgroup of a language with its own vocabulary and grammatical features; writers often use regional dialects or dialects that reveal a person's economic or social class


Jargon
the specialized language or vocabulary of a particular group or profession


(Related) Jargon
The special language of a profession or group. The term usually has pejorative associations, with the implication that jargon is evasive, tedious, and unintelligible to outsiders. The writings of the lawyer and the literary critic are both susceptible to jargon.


(Related) Jargon
A characteristic language of a particular group (as among thieves); "they don't speak our lingo"


Deductive reasoning
reasoning in which a conclusion is reached by stating a general principle and then applying that principle to a specific case


Ellipsis
the deliberate omission of a word or words readily implied by the context.ex. The ceremony honored twelve brilliant athletes from the Caribbean who were visiting the US.The ceremony honored twelve brilliant athletes... visiting the US.


(Related) Ellipsis
Excluding a word (Ex: .... )


(Related) Ellipsis
omission of one or more words, which must be supplied by the listener or reader. Example: Sharon was the first-born; Phil the second.


(Related) Ellipsis
The deliberate omission of a word or words that are readily implied by the context; it creates and elegant or daring economy of words.


Epistrophe
Repeating at the end


(Related) Epistrophe
repetition of a word or expression at the end of successive phrases (Ex: of the people, by the people, for the people)


(Related) Epistrophe
repetition of a word or expression at the end of successive phrases, clauses, sentences, or verses especially for rhetorical or poetic effect (as Lincoln's "of the people, by the people, for the people")


(Related) Epistrophe
The repetition of a phrase at the end of successive sentences or phrases.Ex: "I swear to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth."


epithet
a term used to point out a characteristic of a person. Homeric epithets are often compound adjectives ("swift-footed Achilles") that become an almost formulaic part of a name. Epithets can be abusive or offensive but are not so by definition. For example, athletes may be proud of given epithets ("The Rocket").


(Related) Epithet
adjective/adjective phrase that qualifies subject by naming key characteristicEx: towering scyscraper


(Related) epithet
an adjective or adjective phrases appropriately qualifying a subject by naming a key or important characteristics of the subject


(Related) Epithet
a compound adjective used to point out a characteristic of a person


(Related) Epithet
An adjective or adjective phrase applied to a person or thing to emphasize a characteristic quality or attribute, such as "lily-livered coward"


Inductive reasoning
A method of reasoning in which a number of specific facts or examples are used to make a generalization. It is the opposite of deductive Reasoning.


(Related) inductive reasoning
a method of reasoning in which a number of specific facts or examples are used to make a generalization. Its opposite is deductive reasoning


Isocolon
parallel structure in which the parallel elements are similar not only in grammatical structure but also in length


Litotes
A form of an understatement that involves making an affirmative point by denying its opposite. Ex: "Not a bad idea", "I have this tiny little tumor on my brain."


(Related) Litotes
IRONIC UNDERSTATEMENT. a peculiary anglo saxon backhand way of saying something positive by denying something negative


(Related) Litotes: Definition
A form of understatement, generated by denying the opposite or contrary of the word which otherwise would be used.


(Related) Litotes: What It Does
Retains the effect of the understatement or becomes an intensifying expression.


(Related) Litotes: Example
Hitting that tree certainly didn't do your car any good.


(Related) Litotes: Definition
Definition: Emphasize it's point by using a word opposite the condition.


(Related) Litotes: Usage, Warnings, etc.
Usage, Warnings, etc.: Can be combined with understatement for emphasis (makes the writer not seem arrogant). Allows the reader to say what isn't true without committing as strongly to what is true.


(Related) litotes
A trope in which one makes a deliberate understatement for emphasis. Example: Young lovers are kissing and an observer says: "I think they like each other."


maxim
n. statement of general truth-"An apple a day keeps the doctor away" is a famous maxim by Ben Franklin.


(Related) maxim
an expression of a general truth or principle, esp. an aphoristic or sententious one


(Related) Maxim
a concise statement, often offering advice; an adage


(Related) maxim
A saying or proverb expressing common wisdom maxim or truth.


(Related) maxim
A saying or proverb expressing common wisdom or truth.


Adage
a familiar proverb or wise saying


Metonymy
a figure of speech that uses the name of an object, person, or idea to represent something with which it is associated, such as using "the crown" to refer to a monarch ; Also, "The pen is mightier than the sword."


(Related) metonymy
A term from the Greek meaning "changed label" or "substitute name," metonymy is a figure of speech in which the name of one object is substituted for that of another closely associated with it. For example, a news release that claims "the White House declared" rather than "the President declared" is using metonymy; Shakespeare uses it to signify the male and female sexes in As You Like It: "doublet and hose ought to show itself courageous to petticoat." The substituted term generally carries a more potent emotional impact.


(Related) Metonymy
A type of metaphor in which the name of one object is substituted for that of another closely associated with it. "The White House declared," from the Greek meaning "changed label" or "substitute name"


(Related) Metonymy
substitution of some attributive or suggestive word for what is meant. Example: The White House helped free the reporters held captive in North Korea. The suits make all the money these days!


synecdoche
using one part of an object to represent the entire object


(Related) synecdoche
Figure of speech that uses a part to represent the wholeExample: "In your hands, my fellow citizens, more than mine, will rest the final success or failure of our course."


(Related) synecdoche
a figure of speech in which a part of something is used to represent the whole or, occasionally, the whole is used to represent a part. Examples: To refer to a boat as a "sail"; to refer to a car as "wheels"; to refer to the violins, violas, etc. in an orchestra as "the strings." **Different than metonymy, in which one thing is represented by another thing that is commonly physically associated with it (but is not necessarily a part of it), i.e., referring to a monarch as "the crown" or the President as "The White House."


(Related) Synecdoche
part for the whole, literally "Nice threads"--threads stands in for clothing, and thread is literally part of clothing, so part for the whole, literally.


(Related) synecdoche
simple sentence


(Related) synecdoche
Figure of speech that uses a part to represent the whole... Examp…


(Related) SYNECDOCHE
SYNTACTIC FLUENCY


(Related) SYNECDOCHE
a figure of speech in which a part represents the whole. "If y…


(Related) synecdoche
simple sentence


(Related) synecdoche
Figure of speech that uses a part to represent the whole... Examp…


parallelism
The grammatical or rhetorical framing of words, phrases, sentences, or paragraphs to give structural similarity. (Example: repetition of a grammatical element)


(Related) Parallelism
Figure of balance identified by a similarity in the syntactical structure of a set of words in successive phrases, clauses, and sentences. Similar grammatical structure


(Related) Parallelism
Also referred to as parallel construction or parallel structure, this term comes from Greek roots meaning "beside one another". It refers to the grammatical or rhetorical framing of words, phrases, sentences, or paragraphs to give structural similarity. This can involve, but is not limited to, repetition of a grammatical element such as a preposition or verbal phrase


(Related) Parallelism
Also " " construction and " " structure, this term comes from Greek roots meaning "beside one another." It refers to the grammatical or rhetorical framing of words, phrases, sentences, or paragraphs to give structural similarity. This can involve, but is not limited to, repetition of a grammatical element such as a preposition or verbal phrase. A famous example of parallelism begins A Tale of Two Cities. It has numerous effects, but common ones are: attract reader's attention through organization, add emphasis and organization, or simply provide a musical rhythm.


(Related) Parallelism/parallel structure
Sentence construction which places equal grammatical construction near each other, or repeats identical grammatical patterns.


Parenthetical Aside (Punctuation Added/Repeated for Effect)
Consists of a word, phrase, or whole sentence inserted as an aside in the middle of another sentence


(Related) parenthetical expression
An expression that is inserted into the flow of thought. It may be in the middle of a sentence or between sentences, but it does not deal directly with the topic at hand. These are set off by dashes or parentheses.


(Related) parenthetical aside
consists of a word, phrase, or whole sentence inserted as an aside in the middle of another sentenceelaborates descriptively


(Related) parenthetical aside
consists of a word, phrase, or whole sentence inserted as in aside in he middle of another sentence


(Related) parenthetical aside
consists of a word, phrase, or whole sentence inserted as an aside in the middle of another sentence


Polysyndeton / Freight Train
(Syntactical) Deliberate use of many conjunctions in close succession, especially where some might be omitted; opposite of asyndenton.


(Related) Polysyndeton: Definition
The use of a conjunction between each word, phrase, or clause (opposite of asyndeton).


(Related) Polysyndeton: What It Does
Multiplicity, Encompass something complex, Calls attention to each item in a list


(Related) Polysyndeton: Example
He drank a soda and orange juice and water and wine.


(Related) polysyndeton
a style that employs a great many conjunctions. This usually slows down the flow of the sentence and creates a piling on effect. Example: I love the trees, and the birds, and the flowers, and the many, many aspects of nature.


(Related) Polysyndeton
sentence style that uses many conjunctions to slow the rhythm or to suggest the continuity of the experience


(Related) Polysyndeton 2
5Examples:"He pulled the blue plastic tarp off of him and folded it and carried it out to the grocery cart and packed it and came back with their plates and some cornmeal cakes in a plastic bag and a plastic bottle of syrup."
                                              (Cormac McCarthy, The Road)"Let the whitefolks have their money and power and segregation and sarcasm and big houses and schools and lawns like carpets, and books, and mostly--mostly--let them have their whiteness." (Maya Angelou, I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings,)


Pun
When a word that has two or more meanings is used in a humorous way. "My dog has a fur coat and pants!" "I was stirred by his cooking lesson."


(Related) Pun(zeugma)
a word employed in two or more sense, or a word used in a context that suggests a second term sounding like it. ( special kind of pun: a verb used with two or more objects for a comic effect)


(Related) pun
A play on words in which a homophone is repeated but used in a different sense. Examples: "She was always game for any game."


(Related) pun
A play on words that are either identical in sound (homonyms) or similar in sound, but are sharply diverse in meaning.Example: "Thou art Peter (Petros) and upon this rock (petra) I will build my church."Early puns had roots in serious literature, that like Shakespeare, can also have a comical effect in a very serious situation.Example: In Romeo and Juliet, while bleeding to death, Mercutio says "Ask for me tomorrow and you shall find me a grave man."By the eighteenth century and after, the literary use of puns has been almost exclusively comic.Equivoque: the use of a single word or phrase which has two disparate meanings, in a context which makes both meanings equally relevant.Example: An epitaph suggested for a bank teller, which states, "He checked his cash, cashed in his checks. And left his window. Who is next?"


rhetorical shift
a strong change in tone or approach


Satire
the use of humor, irony, exaggeration, or ridicule to expose and criticize people's stupidity or vices


(Related) Horatian satire
satire which criticizes playfully through light-hearted humor what the satirist identifies as folly; named after the Roman satirist Horace


(Related) Juvenalian satire
satire which criticizes contemptuously, addressing social evil through scorn, outrage, and invective; named after the Roman satirist Juvenal


(Related) Satire
Form of literature in which irony, sarcasm, scorn, and ridicule are employed to attack human vice and folly.


(Related) Satire
The use of wit- especially irony, sarcasm, and ridicule- to attack the vices and follies of humankind


(Related) Types of Satire
Horatian and Juvenalian


(Related) Horatian Satire
named after the poet Horace and is characterized by good-natured, tolerant sense of humor about human folly. it tells the truth with a smile.1. Parks and Recreation2. "I didn't see no di'monds, and I told Tom Sawyer so. He said there was loads of them there anyway; and he said there was A-rabs there, too, and elephants and things. Said, why couldn't we see them, then?"


(Related) Juvenalian Satire
after the Roman satirist Juvenal: Formal satire in which the speaker attacks vice and error with contempt and indignation Juvenalian satire in its realism and its harshness is in strong contrast to Horatian satire 1. South Park2. Pap's rant about the "gov'ment"


(Related) satire
language or writing that exposes follies or abuses by holding the, up to ridicule1. The Daily Show with John Stewart2. "temperance revival meetings"


syllogism
three-part statement where one major premise and one minor premise leads to a conclusion (A=B, C=A, then C=B) or (all humans are mortal, socrates is human, socrates is mortal); note that for a conclusion to be true, so must the premises be true


(Related) Syllogism
Deductive system of formal logic that presents two premises (the first one called "major" and the second called "minor") that inevitably lead to a sound conclusion.


(Related) Syllogism
A three-part deductive argument in which a conclusion is based on a major premise and a minor premise